# Data Types

JavaScript is a dynamically typed programming language, allowing variables to be assigned any type and changed later. This means that variables are not bound by data types.

```javascript
let variable = "Cat";
variable = 123;
```

There are seven [primitive](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Primitive) data types:

- **Number**

  Represents integers and floating-point numbers. Special numeric values include: `Infinity`, `-Infinity`, and `NaN`. `NaN` represents a computational error, resulting from an incorrect or undefined mathematical operation.

  ```javascript
  console.log(1 / 0); // Infinity
  console.log(-1 / 0); // -Infinity
  console.log("Cat" / 0); // NaN
  ```

- **BigInt**

  The maximum integer value for a `number` is $1.7976931348623157 \times 10^{308}$. Beyond the safe integer range ±($2^{53}-1$), precision errors occur as not all digits fit into the fixed 64-bit storage. Not compatible with IE as of 04.06.2024.

- **String**

  Can be encapsulated in single or double quotes, and backticks. Backticks offer extended functionality such as:

  ```javascript
  console.log(`The result of 1 + 4 is: ${1 + 4}.`); // 5
  ```

  or:

  ```javascript
  let username = prompt("Please provide username.");
  alert(`The username provided is: ${username}`);
  ```

- **Boolean**

  Represents `true` or `false`.

  ```javascript
  console.log(1 > 2); // false
  ```

- **null**

  Represents a value like "nothing", "empty", or "value unknown". Used over `undefined` to assign an "empty" or "unknown" value to a variable.

  ```javascript
  let age = null;
  let height;
  console.log(age); // null
  console.log(height); // undefined
  ```

- **undefined**

  Represents a value that is "not assigned".

  ```javascript
  let height;
  console.log(height); // undefined
  ```

- **Symbol**

  Used to create unique identifiers for objects.

All primitives are immutable; they cannot be altered. It is important not to confuse a primitive itself with a variable assigned a primitive value. The variable may be reassigned to a new value, but the existing value cannot be changed in the ways that objects, arrays, and functions can be altered. The language does not offer utilities to mutate primitive values[^1].

The final data type in JavaScript is an object, which is used for complex data structures.

The `typeof` operator returns the type of an operand.

```javascript
typeof undefined; // "undefined"
typeof 0; // "number"
typeof 10n; // "bigint"
typeof true; // "boolean"
typeof "foo"; // "string"
typeof Symbol("id"); // "symbol"
typeof Math; // "object"  (1)
typeof null; // "object"  (2)
typeof alert; // "function"  (3)
```

- `Math` (1) is a built-in object providing mathematical operations.
- `null` (2) is not an object but a separate data type. The erroneous output is kept for backwards compatibility reasons.
- `alert` (3) output (`function`) originates from the early days of JavaScript. Functions belong to the object type, but `typeof` treats them differently, returning `function`.

# References

[^1]: [Mozilla: Primitives](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Primitive)
